==DAS workshop, March 2011==

2nd-4th March at the Genome Campus, Hinxton UK. 

A workshop is being held on the 2-4th March at the Genome Campus outside Cambridge for agenda see here [http://www.biodas.org/wiki/DASWorkshop2011 agenda] and for registration see here: [http://www.ebi.ac.uk//training/onsite/110302DAS.html registration]

== GMOD Europe meeting, September 2010 ==

A [http://gmod.org/wiki/GMOD_Europe_2010 2 day meeting] of the Generic Model Organism Database project.

== Sanger/EBI DAS Workshop, April 2010 ==

7th-9th April 2010 at the Wellcome Trust /EBI Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK.

A [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/training/handson/DAS_070410.html 3-day workshop on DAS] hosted by EBI/Sanger. Includes a hands-on day of tutorials, a day of talks from DAS contributors and users as well as a hackathon/discussion day for progressing DAS projects.

See the [[DASWorkshop2010|schedule]] for the latest information on tutorials and presentations.

== EBI Programmatic access in Perl, Feb 2010 ==

22nd-26th February 2010 at the European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, UK.

[http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Information/events/calendar/viewevent.php?events_category_id=&events_subcategory_id=&start_date=20100222090000&events_data_id=1609&end_date=20100226140000 Details]

== Sanger/EBI DAS Workshop, March 2009 ==

9th-11th March 2009 at the Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK.

A [http://www.dasregistry.org/course.jsp 3-day workshop on DAS, 9-11 March 2009] hosted by EBI/Sanger. Includes a hands-on day of tutorials, a day of talks from DAS contributors and users as well as a hackathon/discussion day for progressing DAS projects.

See the [[DASworkshop200903|schedule]] for the tutorials and presentations.

== EBI Programmatic access in Java, Nov 2008==

24th-27th November 2008 at the European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, UK.

See Perl course for topics.

== Programmatic access in Perl, Sep 2008==

8th-11th September 2008 at the European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, UK.

Topics:
* Introduction to the EBI and Webservices
* Rest and SOAP; application to EBI services (e.g. OLS, PICR, see http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/webservices/)
* DAS
* BioMart and Biomart Webservices
* Integr8
* Workflows: TAVERNA, Enfin, Encor

== ECCB Conference Sardinia, Sep 2008==

Talks:
{| border="border"
! Topics
! Presenter
! Slides
|-
| DAS overview; Dazzle; SPICE;
| Andreas Prlic
| 
|-
| Proserver; Ensembl
| Andy Jenkinson
| [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/~aj/ECCB_2008/ slides]
|-
| DAS ontology
| Henning Hermjakob
| 
|-
| Dasty2
| Omar Pera Mira)
| 
|-
| DASMI
| Mario Albrecht
| 
|}

== BOSC, July 2008==

A BioDAS project update will be presented at the [http://www.open-bio.org/wiki/BOSC_2008 2008 BOSC] (Bioinformatics Open Source Conference), a two day Special Interest Group meeting in conjunction with the [http://www.iscb.org/ismb2008/ ISMB] conference. This year's BOSC will be held 18th-19th July in Toronto, Canada.

Presentation given by Andy Jenkinson: [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/~aj/BOSC_2008/ here]

== DILS, June 2008==

DAS will be represented at the 2008 Data Integration in the Life Sciences (DILS) conference. This year's conference will be held 25th-27th June in Evry, France. See http://dils2008.lri.fr/ for details.

Presentation given by Andy Jenkinson: [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/~aj/DILS_2008/ here]

For paper see [[DAS_publications]].

== European School in Bioinformatics, May 2008==

The BioSapiens ESB is an intensive five-day course that combines lectures and hands-on tutorials to help the participants actively learn and resolve biologically relevant problems. The 8th ESB is to be held 12th-16th May at the European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, UK and focuses on using Europe’s core biological data resources and associated tools to analyse biological data. The first day of the course focuses on DAS.

See http://www.ebi.ac.uk/training/handson/course_080512_biosapiens.html for more details.

see  [[EuropeanSchoolBioinformatics200805| the DAS slides of the school]]

== BioSapiens DAS workshop, Feb 2008==

The BioSapiens Network of Excellence are organising a 2-day workshop on DAS, held 25th-26th February 2008 at the Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK. For more information see http://www.dasregistry.org/course.jsp.

===Day 1===

Similar to the DAS client developers workshop from last year, this is the day where developers present their DAS related applications, websites and discuss new ideas.
* present the progress over the last year
* find synergies
* see if/how interoperability can be improved
* discuss possible future extensions to DAS

See http://www.dasregistry.org/course.jsp for slides.

===Day 2===
 
This is the practical day where you can learn how to work with DAS.
* learn what you can do with DAS
* how to talk to a DAS server
* how to set up your own servers

See [[DASworkshop200802]] for slides.

== BioSapiens DAS workshop, Feb 2007==

The Biosapiens Network ( http://www.biosapiens.info/ ) is a project 
that has a strong commitment to DAS
and has been very pro-active in setting up DAS/1 servers (lots of 
protein data) and developing DAS clients.

Around this EU-wide collaboration they are organizing two DAS-related 
workshops. They will both be held in the last week of February, location is the 
Genome Campus in Hinxton / Cambridge, U.K.

===workshop 1===
DAS client developers workshop
Monday 26/2/2007
main organizer: Andreas Prlic
for more info please see:
http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Users/ap3/dasworkshop.html

===workshop 2===
BioSapiens Feature Classification (Ontology) Workshop
Tuesday, 27/2/2007, Wednesday, 28/2/2007
main organizer: Henning Hermjakob
Summary:

:''We propose to develop a hierarchical classification of DAS feature types based on the [http://obo.sourceforge.net/ OBO] format and existing feature ontologies like the [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ontology-lookup/browse.do?ontName=SO Sequence Ontology (SO)]. This will then be the standard BioSapiens feature classification. This will allow clients to easily implement a meaningful default view for features as well as a user-friendly browser configuration by e.g. only showing feature groups of interest. We also propose to annotate features with default servers, so that e.g. structural features for a protein are only shown from one server in default views.''