
<big>'''The DAS/2 Protocol'''</big>

== About DAS/2 ==

DAS/2 is intended to be a more flexible and powerful version of the original specification upon which the majority of servers are based, [[DAS/1]]. The two versions are not natively compatible. The DAS/2 code base consists of:

# DAS/2 Specification:
#* [http://biodas.org/documents/das2/das2_protocol.html DAS/2.0 specification] (stable)
#* [[DAS/2.1/Spec| DAS/2.1 specification]] (under development)
# [http://das.biopackages.net/das/genome A publicly accessible DAS/2 server implementation] (inactive?) (open source code available from the [http://www.gmod.org/ GMOD project])
# [http://genoviz.sourceforge.net An open-source DAS/2 client implementation]
# [http://sourceforge.net/projects/dasypus An open-source client library and server validation suite] 

See [[DAS/2#CVS Access]] for details on retrieving code related to these projects.

=== DAS/2 History ===

DAS/2 diverged from [[DAS/1]] as a result of a variety of [http://biodas.org/RFCs/index.html RFCs (Requests for Comment)] posted on the DAS mailing list from users and implementers of the DAS spec over the first several years after DAS was originally introduced. As of November 2006, the [http://biodas.org/documents/das2/das2_get.html retrieval portion of the DAS/2 spec] has stabilized. Implementers and service providers can rely on this for their DAS/2-based development efforts.

Work on what became the DAS/2.0 specification "officially" began in July 2004 when funding was awarded for a 2-year NIH grant for DAS/2 development ([http://crisp.cit.nih.gov/crisp/CRISP_LIB.getdoc?textkey=6712060&p_grant_num=1R01HG003040-01&p_query=(DAS)&ticket=15416031&p_audit_session_id=72191905&p_audit_score=100&p_audit_numfound=1&p_keywords=DAS abstract], [http://biodas.s3.amazonaws.com/das2grant/DAS2+Grant+Proposal+Feb2003.doc full proposal]). The grant was subsequently extended, and the grant funding period ended October 2007 ([http://biodas.s3.amazonaws.com/das2grant/DAS2+Grant+Final+Progress+Report+Aug2008.doc final progress report]). Participating in the DAS/2 grant were Affymetrix, Cold Spring Harbor Lab, the European Bioinformatics Institute/Sanger Center, and Dalke Scientific. 

Given that the DAS/2 specification is not backward compatible with the DAS/1 version, existing DAS software will continue to support DAS/1. A [http://lists.open-bio.org/pipermail/das2/2008-October/001055.html DAS proxy server is in development] that will permit a DAS/1 server to be accessed by DAS/2 clients.

== DAS/2 Clients ==

The following software packages support the client-side DAS/2 API for interacting with DAS/2-compliant servers:

* [http://genoviz.sourceforge.net IGB - Integrated Genome Browser] - a DAS/2 reference implementation
* [http://www.gmod.org/GBrowse GBrowse - Generic Genome Browser]
* [http://cabio.nci.nih.gov/NCICB/infrastructure/cacore_overview/caBIO caBIO Infrastructure Objects] ''(confirm this)''

== DAS/2 Servers ==

The following software packages operate as servers capable of providing data in response to queries conforming with the DAS/2 protocol:

* [http://netaffxdas.affymetrix.com/das2 Affymetrix Public DAS/2 server]
* [http://bioserver.hci.utah.edu:8080/DAS2DB/ Huntsman Cancer Institute's DAS/2 server]
* [http://das.biopackages.net/das/genome Biopackages DAS/2 server] - (inactive?) a DAS/2 reference implementation

== DAS/2 Validation Suite ==

See [[Das2Validation]].

== Publishing, Discovering, and Registering DAS/2 sources ==
Currently, the [http://www.dasregistry.org DasRegistry] does not support DAS/2 services.

As a temporary fix, download the 'das2Registry.xml' file from the [http://genoviz.svn.sourceforge.net/viewvc/genoviz/trunk/das2_server/resources/ GenoViz Project], add an entry, and email it back to [mailto:genoviz-devel@lists.sourceforge.net  GenoViz] or [mailto:das@biodas.org BioDas]. If you have access to the GenoViz SVN, modify it directly.

== Global Sequence Identifiers==

See [[GlobalSeqIDs]]

== Feedback and Bug Reports ==

A general forum for advice on DAS/2-related issues is the [http://biodas.org/mailman/listinfo/das2 discussion list].

To submit or view bug reports in DAS/2-related software, use one of the links below, depending on the affected component.

* DAS/2 Specification:
**   http://bugzilla.open-bio.org/
* Reference Server (GMOD Project - select category 'DAS2'):
**    http://sourceforge.net/tracker/?group_id=27707&atid=391291
* Reference Client (IGB):
**    http://sourceforge.net/tracker/?group_id=129420&atid=714744
* Validation Suite (Dasypus):
**    https://sourceforge.net/tracker/?group_id=138271&atid=740641

== CVS Access ==

There are separate repositories for the DAS/2 specification, DAS/2 client and server reference implementations, and the validation suite. These are for developers only since they do not represent stable releases and may contain modifications that contain bugs. The one exception is the schema for the retrieval portion of the DAS/2 spec, which is now stable.

* DAS/2 spec: 
** <code>:pserver:cvs@cvs.biodas.org:/home/repository/biodas</code>
*** (login password="cvs", directory=das/das2, XML schema for retrieval spec: das2_schemas.rnc)
* [http://genoviz.sourceforge.net DAS/2 Client reference implementation] ("IGB")
* [http://gmod.org DAS/2 Server reference implementation] (see das2 package)
* [http://sourceforge.net/projects/dasypus/ DAS/2 validation suite] ("Dasypus")

See http://www.open-bio.org/wiki/SourceCode for general pointers about anonymous access to [http://open-bio.org open-bio.org]-hosted source code.