Although it is the first in several years, the [[DAS1.6|DAS 1.6]] specification is not principally intended to accommodate brand new features. Instead, it broadly aims to:
# correct inconsistencies and ambiguities in the [http://www.biodas.org/documents/spec-1.53.html DAS 1.53] specification
# ratify concepts and extensions from [http://www.dasregistry.org/spec_1.53E.jsp DAS 1.53E] that are already in widespread use
# make more areas of the protocol easier to implement by relaxing unnecessary or unfeasible requirements
# deprecate legacy or little used elements of the protocol

As a result the changes are largely non-destructive and compatible. The major exception to the above is the introduction of "parent/part" hierarchical features. This is a replacement for the <GROUP> element, inspired by [[DAS/2]] rather than [http://www.dasregistry.org/spec_1.53E.jsp 1.53E].

From the specification itself, the list of changes includes:
* Introduced the concept of "coordinate systems" and the DAS Registry.
* New commands: sources and structure. These commands are taken from DAS 1.53E, with some changes.
* Added support for using ontologies in annotations.
* Deprecated commands: dsn, dna and link.
* Stylesheets now support histograms, colour gradients and line plots, more colours, and are better characterised. The "toomany" glyph is deprecated.
* Entry points command gained "paging", and other minor changes.
* Nonpositional annotations are now supported.
* Features command gained "maxbins".
* All command responses are now described by RELAX NG schemas.
* Relaxed the constraints on data source names.
* Clarified the use of HTTP and DAS status codes.
* Clarified content encodings and compression.
* Added requirement for clients to include specific request headers.
* Features command gained hierarchical referencing, in favour of groups.
* Segment query parameters no longer require start and end positions.
* Several elements in the features command response are now optional.
* Unified the format of segment XML across all commands.
* Clarified the content of attributes across several commands, such as segment versions.