==DAS Registry: Publishing and Discovery of DAS Servers==

The DAS registration server at [http://www.dasregistry.org www.dasregistry.org]
provides a repository where people can publish and share their DAS data sources (i.e., server locations and available data) with the community. 

The [[DAS/1]] and [[DAS/2]] specifications do not define how to publish or discover DAS data sources (servers). Due to the success of DAS/1 and the large number of sources that are spread around the world it is not easy to keep track of these.

The DAS registry provdies a Web interface so users can search for available [[DAS/1]] data sources. For DAS-clients, an XML interface is available that allows a programmatic way to retrieve data source listings, and several DAS clients now make use of this.

A cut-down static mirror of the main programmatic Registry responses is available here:
* http://www.ebi.ac.uk/das-srv/registry/das/sources (a mirror of http://www.dasregistry.org/das/sources)
* http://www.ebi.ac.uk/das-srv/registry/das/coordinatesystem (a mirror of http://www.dasregistry.org/das/coordinatesystem)
The mirror is updated at midnight (UK time).

For more info on this please see the [http://www.dasregistry.org/help_scripting.jsp documentation].

==Installing local version of DAS registry==
Some very rough [[DAS registry installation notes]] on Gregg Helt's attempts to get a local installation of the DAS registry running, and modifications to the registry code to support a merged DAS1/DAS2 registry.

== [[DAS/2]] ==

Currently, the [http://www.dasregistry.org DasRegistry] does not support DAS/2 services.

As a temporary fix, download the 'das2Registry.xml' file from the [http://genoviz.svn.sourceforge.net/viewvc/genoviz/trunk/das2_server/resources/ GenoViz Project], add an entry, and email it back to [mailto:genoviz-devel@lists.sourceforge.net  GenoViz] or [mailto:das@biodas.org BioDas]. If you have access to the GenoViz SVN, modify it directly.