---
title: GSoC2011
permalink: wiki/GSoC2011/
layout: wiki
---

Google Summer of Code 2011
==========================

The Open Bio Foundation is a mentoring organisation for Google Summer of
Code 2011. As an OBF project, BioDAS contributors would be pleased to
act as mentors for students wishing to work on DAS software. A couple of
ideas for projects are listed below.

Redesign of the DAS Registry
----------------------------

The DAS Registry plays a pivotal role in the DAS ecosystem. It is a
central repository of DAS server metadata, allowing both humans and
software applications to discover and interact with the myriad DAS data
sources available. We believe that by offering specific functionality,
the Registry can incentivise adoption and adherence of the DAS protocol.

This project would likely comprise three phases:

1.  Rationalise the underlying codebase, including the removal of
    redundant code
2.  Build a new lightweight user-focussed interface based on the
    underlying DAS web services
3.  Expand functionality, for example ontological-based searching

The project would suit individuals with knowledge of:

-   Java development
-   RESTful web services
-   User-experience and interface design

Mentors: [Jonathan Warren](mailto:jw12@sanger.ac.uk) and [Andy
Jenkinson](mailto:andy.jenkinson@ebi.ac.uk)

DAS Server for large files on local filesystems
-----------------------------------------------

DAS servers allow organisations and individuals to visualise the results
of their experiments alongside other public data in web-based DAS
clients such as the Ensembl Genome Browser. However, running a DAS
server on a publicly-accessible dedicated web server is often beyond the
skill or resources available to a typical researcher. New developments
such as [easyDAS](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/panda-srv/easydas) go some way to
addressing this problem by allowing a user to upload files to a DAS
server, but are not ideal when dealing with large data files such as
large scale sequencing experiments.

We would like to develop a DAS server that may be run on a researcher's
own machine in order to inject large-scale data into DAS clients for
visualisation. This has a major technical challenge: web addressing.
Such an application would need to somehow make a machine on a firewalled
local network visible to the outside world. This problem affects many
application areas other than DAS, but we believe a viable solution
exists in the form of a "client pull" proxy system, inspired by [Opera
Unite](http://unite.opera.com/).

The project would suit individuals with knowledge of:

-   The HTTP protocol
-   Java development

Mentor: [Andy Jenkinson](mailto:andy.jenkinson@ebi.ac.uk)
